And again, come up with somewhat
made up example here.
Let's say that in this build job here
where we produce the dist folder,
which we then upload as an artifact,
we also wanna get the name of the generated JavaScript file
in this assets folder in the dist folder.
So of this JavaScript file
We wanna get the name of that file
because that name is actually kind of randomly generated.
It's not always the same name.
Now of course, we could get that name in the deploy job
by simply looking into the assets folder,
which we download as an artifact here.
But let's say that for some reason we wanna get access
to that name here in the build job.
And we then wanna make that file name available
to the deploy job so that we have one value
that's derived by one job.
The name of the file derived in the build job
that should be usable in another job.
So in the deploy job here.
If that's kind of what we need,
and again, I'm aware that it's kind of a made up example,
but it shows how to work with outputs,
which is the important part here.
If that's what we need,
then GitHub Actions has a feature we can use for that
because jobs can produce outputs.
And by the way, this feature will become
even more important later in the course
once we dive into building custom actions
because custom actions also will be able to produce outputs.
But again, I will get back to that later.
Then this feature will make even more sense.
But it's good to get started with it right here already.
So let's say here, after building the website,
we wanna get hold of that file name of that JavaScript file.
I'll give this step a name of publish JS file name
because the goal of this job will be
to get the JavaScript file name
and to then publish it so that other jobs can use it.
And for that, we need to run a script here.
Now the command is a bit more complex.
That's why you also find it attached in a text file.
This year is the command that should be executed.
It's a regular Linux command that finds us
the JavaScript file in the assets folder in the dist folder
and then it basically executes the echo command
to output that file name.
If you would run this command like this on a Linux machine,
it would simply output the file name
of this JavaScript file.
And since I am on macOS here,
which builds up on Linux, kind of,
I can show you this command.
If I run this here in my local terminal,
it outputs the file name of this JavaScript file.
That's what this command currently does.
But that's actually not too helpful yet
because yes, this output's the file name,
but the idea is to publish the file name
to make it available in other jobs.
And to make it available, we must create a so called output,
which is a separate thing in GitHub Actions,
which is different from artifacts.
An output or an output value is a simple value.
So not a file, but instead a number
or some text or anything like this.
A simple value that should be produced by the job
that should be accessible by other jobs.
And to generate and share such output,
we must add a new key here at the top level
of this job definition before we define the steps.
And that's the outputs key.
Outputs then allows us to define any outputs of our choice
and as many outputs as we want.
For example, the script -file output.
This identifier is again up to you
because this is the identifier
by which you later will be able to access the output value.
So here I add my script file output.
And now with that added, we're not fully done here,
but with that added down here, we can set our output.
And this is done by using a special syntax
that's supported by GitHub Actions.
Here, right before this opening closing curly brace thing,
we add double colon and then set-output.
This is a command, a special command that's detected
and understood by GitHub Actions, which we can use together
with the run command here.
To be precise, you use it with the run command
and then with the echo command.
So the text which you echo out,
the text which you display on the console
accepts these special commands here
in your GitHub Actions workflows to do special things.
And if you take a look at the official
workflow commands documentation page,
you will see that there are different supported commands
though the set output command is arguably
the most important command.
This is a command which can be used, as shown here as well,
to share an output with subsequent steps or jobs.
So here we're using this set output command,
but it's not finished just like this.
Instead, after using colon colon set-output,
you must add a blank, and then you add the name keyword.
So this is not up to you.
This must be name equals and then the name of your output,
which in my case will be script-file.
So script-file is what I add here.
And after that name, you again add two subsequent colons.
And then without a white space,
the value that should be stored
under this output identifier.
And here, this strange looking value
opening closing curly brace
simply belongs to this overall command
and refers to the file name
that is identified here by the first part of that command.
So this will be the file name.
So it's the file name that's stored under this identifier
with help of this special set output command.
And these commands can be very useful
because they help you share data across jobs or steps.
So now with that, we're setting a value here.
But to now map it to this output here,
we also must do something else up here.
Here we must use this GitHub Actions expression syntax,
which I showed you earlier in the course already
where you add a dollar sign
and then two opening and two closing curly braces
to evaluate some dynamic expression
and derive value based on the evaluation of that expression.
So it's that dynamically evaluated value
that will be stored under this identifier ultimately.
And since this is under the output key here,
this will be a published output by this job.
So the expression that should be evaluated here
now must refer to another GitHub context data object.
And here for these GitHub Action context data objects,
we earlier saw the GitHub object, earlier in this course.
This gave us some metadata information about the workflow,
the event that triggered the workflow and so on.
Now we need another context data object,
which we wanna use here.
And that's the steps metadata object,
the steps context object.
And it's important to keep in mind
that GitHub Actions supports multiple context objects.
And we'll see the different context objects in action
throughout this course.
Now we're using the steps context object here,
which contains information about the different steps
that make up the job in which we're using it.
Previously, we used the GitHub object,
now it's the steps object.
And later in the course, we will, for example,
also access the env object here and other objects as well.
So this steps object contains data
about the steps that belong to this job.
And it's the steps object that allows us
to get hold of an output published by an individual step.
Because this set output command actually publishes an output
for the step in which we use it.
Not for the job in which we use it.
To make it a job output, we must map it up here.
So now since it's this step that published this output,
we wanna get access to the data published by this step.
To do that, we should give this step an ID,
which is a field we haven't used before in this course.
But you can add the ID field to all your steps.
And the ID field is useful
whenever you're using the steps context object
to dive into a specific step.
And for example, get the output data published by a step.
Now the ID value is totally up to you.
And here, I'll simply name it publish,
but again, it is up to you.
But with that ID added here,
you can go back to your steps context object
and then with the dot notation,
access that step by using its ID.
So now here we're using publish here
because I used publish down there.
So that's how you can access these different steps
with the steps object.
Now that we access this step,
we can access the outputs field on that step.
All your steps have this.
So that's now again, a field defined by GitHub Actions
that our steps have this outputs object here,
this outputs field.
And that is another nested object,
which now has all the outputs published by the step
which we're accessing as fields.
So since in this step I'm publishing the script file output,
I can access script file here.
And therefore, technically, we could have actually used
a different name down here as we did up there
because it's not directly mapping to the outputs up here.
But instead, we're manually mapping it
with help of this evaluation.
Still, it makes sense to use the same output names
in all these places to make it very clear
that these outputs belong together.
But that's now how we access the output published by a step
to then publish it as a output by the overall job here.
And with that output published,
we can use it in another job.